Add Vxlan Cable Driver (#29)
submariner-io/enhancements: submariner/vxlan-tunnel.md

# Encryption-less connections between clusters with VXLAN

## Summary

All current cable drivers involve encrypting content, which is great for privacy but involves some overhead.

> On private connections, it would be useful to allow unencrypted connections, for example using IP-on-IP or VxLAN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On private connections, it would be useful to allow unencrypted connections, for example using IP-on-IP or VXLAN.
```

> On private connections, it would be useful to enable unencrypted connections, for example using IP-on-IP or VxLAN.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On private connections, it would be useful to allow unencrypted connections, for example using IP-on-IP or VxLAN.
```

## Proposal

This enhancement proposes to use VXLAN for un-encrypted connection between clusters. A new VXLAN interface "vxlan-tunnel"
will be added to the active gateway node of each cluster and it will act as the VTEP. The traffic which is destined to other
clusters will be forwarded via this interface to the appropriate clusters.

## Design Details

> * A new interface "vxlan-tunnel" will be added

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A new interface "vxlan-tunnel" will be added.
```

* The VXLAN interface will be one-to-many, that is a single interface will be used to connect to all the joined clusters. 

> * For the VXLAN VTEP IP, the prefix "241" and will use the rest of the blocks from the endpoint IP

Reviewer 2: Can you clarify this?

Author: Added an example

> * For the VXLAN VTEP IP, the prefix "241" and will use the rest of the blocks from the endpoint private IP address. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For the VXLAN VTEP IP, the prefix "241" will be used, followed by the rest of the blocks from the endpoint private IP address. For example,
```

> * For the VXLAN VTEP IP, the prefix "241" will be used, followed by the rest of the blocks from the endpoint private IP address. For example,

Reviewer 3: We keep adding to the reserved 240.0.0.0/4 class E range of IPv4, I wonder if there's a better solution to that.
we are at risk that such range would eventually used for something and submariner would sink :P

@sridhargaddam Do we know if it would be possible to assign IPv6 addresses to the gateways (we could use LLAs) and use those as destination of IPv4 networks?, I know it's quite bizarre, but, technically it may be possible, as in the end, we only need the destination MAC address for routing, but may be the kernel won't support this.

Reviewer 4: @mangelajo I'll have to check if it works. I've seen some conversations in the past where people completely disable IPv6 in the underlay, so even if it works, for such clusters there could be an issue (though a remote possibility). Its worth spending time on this and trying to understand if it works.

In the meantime, as you know, currently we have a hardcoded 240.0.0.0/8 range. Shall we expose that as an environment variable (even if its hidden to the users) so that we can customize it, if necessary, just to mitigate situations where 240.0.0.0/8 is not allowed for some reason.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be ok to make IPv6 stack a requirement if it worked (i'm not sure). The risk of the 240/4 range is dangerous ':)

An env var could help. but to which range would they migrate? 

We probably should book some time in the future (0.11?) to investigate alternatives to this. But for now 241.x.x.x should be fine I think.

Reviewer 4: > An env var could help. but to which range would they migrate?

Any other range in the Reserved Class E network. This is to get Submariner working instead of sinking :P 

>We probably should book some time in the future (0.11?) to investigate alternatives to this. But for now 241.x.x.x should be fine I think.

If we make it configurable, we can update the CIDR to 241.0.0.0/8 if required. But yes, we should look for alternatives and find a better solution.

Author: Raised https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/issues/1321 to track.

> * The remote clusters IP (either public or private ) will be added to the Forwarding Database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The remote cluster endpoint IPs (either public or private ) will be added to the Forwarding Database
```

> * The routes will be added to forward all the Service CIDR and POD CIDR to the respective remote VTEP IP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The routes will be added to forward all the Service and Pod CIDR traffic to the respective remote VTEP IP.
```

> * The remote cluster endpoint IPs (either public or private ) will be added to the Forwarding Database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The remote cluster endpoint IPs (either public or private) will be added to the Forwarding Database.
```

* The routes will be added to forward all the Service and Pod CIDR traffic to the respective remote VTEP IP.

> * Table 150 shall be used to add the routes, which is otherwise used for host network traffic routes. We do not require any

Reviewer 3: Please note that in OVN we use:

149 for remote-clusters -> local cluster traffic steering
150 for host net to remote cluster steering (I believe..)

Author: @mangelajo I used 150 since host-networking routes was using it, should that be changed?

Author: Changed to 100

extra rules to handle host network traffic for the VXLAN driver.

> * The IPSEC_NATT_PORT used port shall be used as the VTEP port. The parameter name shall be changed to TUNNEL_PORT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The IPSEC_NATT_PORT used port shall be used as the VTEP port. The parameter name shall be changed to TUNNEL_PORT.
```

Reviewer: This is both in Submariner and in the Operator, right? Can you please identify other references to IPsec in the code that should be abstracted? Even `subctl` says things like 

cmd.Flags().BoolVar(&natTraversal, "natt", true, "enable NAT traversal for IPsec")
cmd.Flags().BoolVar(&disableNat, "disable-nat", false, "disable NAT for IPsec")

Author: Added the repos where this change will be required.

> * The IPSEC_NATT_PORT used port shall be used as the VTEP port. The parameter name shall be changed to TUNNEL_PORT. This requires changes

Reviewer 3: we can set it now as gateway.submariner.io/udp-port label. May be we can call it just GATEWAY_UDP_PORT
 for uniformity?, also in subctl join --gateway-udp-port ? or

An important problem with vxlan, at least in the past is that src & dst port should be equal, so it doesn't work with non-uniform udp ports.  Unless the kernel has changed (it was a kernel limitation). We need to verify if that works, and otherwise, we probably need to log an error when a connection is attempted between endpoints not sharing the same port number.

Author: Done. I have added item in the EPIC to validate the non-uniform port case.
https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/issues/674

## Work items

* [New cable driver](https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/issues/1149)
* [CI](https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/issues/1148)
* [Deployment(Operator, subctl)](https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-operator/issues/1101)
* [Deployment (helm)](https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-charts/issues/116)
* [Metrics](https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/issues/1150)
* [Docs](https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner-website/issues/450)

> * [cloud-prepare](https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/issues/1319)

Reviewer: IIUC, there is nothing to change in cloud-prepare. The implementation there is already abstracted and not specific to IPsec, i.e:

{Port: nattPort, Protocol: "udp"},
{Port: natDiscoveryPort, Protocol: "udp"},

Author: Removed from to do
